<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 14</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-14" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>Chapter 14</h2>
			<p class="firstpara" id="c14p1" title="#c14p1"><span class="firstword">Several</span> days slowly passed thanks to certain measures which succeeded in tricking the stomach, but one morning <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Des Esseintes</span> could endure food no longer, and he asked himself anxiously whether his already serious weakness would not grow worse and force him to take to bed. A sudden gleam of light relieved his distress; he remembered that one of his friends, quite ill at one time, had made use of a Papin’s digester to overcome his anæmia and preserve what little strength he had.</p>
			<p id="c14p2" title="#c14p2">He dispatched his servant to <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Paris</span> for this precious utensil, and following the directions contained in the prospectus which the manufacturer had enclosed, he himself instructed the cook how to cut the roast beef into bits, put it into the pewter pot, with a slice of leek and carrot, and screw on the cover to let it boil for four hours.</p>
			<p id="c14p3" title="#c14p3">At the end of this time the meat fibres were strained. He drank a spoonful of the thick salty juice deposited at the bottom of the pot. Then he felt a warmth, like a smooth caress, descend upon him.</p>
			<p id="c14p4" title="#c14p4">This nourishment relieved his pain and nausea, and even strengthened his stomach which did not refuse to accept these few drops of soup.</p>
			<p id="c14p5" title="#c14p5">Thanks to this digester, his neurosis was arrested and <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Des Esseintes</span> said to himself: “Well, it is so much gained; perhaps the temperature will change, the sky will throw some ashes upon this abominable sun which exhausts me, and I shall hold out without accident till the first fogs and frosts of winter.”</p>
			<p id="c14p6" title="#c14p6">In the torpor and listless ennui in which he was sunk, the disorder of his library, whose arrangement had never been completed, irritated him. Helpless in his armchair, he had constantly in sight the books set awry on the shelves propped against each other or lying flat on their sides, like a tumbled pack of cards. This disorder offended him the more when he contrasted it with the perfect order of his religious works, carefully placed on parade along the walls.</p>
			<p id="c14p7" title="#c14p7">He tried to clear up the confusion, but after ten minutes of work, perspiration covered him; the effort weakened him. He stretched himself on a couch and rang for his servant.</p>
			<p id="c14p8" title="#c14p8">Following his directions, the old man continued the task, bringing each book in turn to <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Des Esseintes</span> who examined it and directed where it was to be placed.</p>
			<p id="c14p9" title="#c14p9">This task did not last long, for <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Des Esseintes</span>‘ library contained but a very limited number of contemporary, secular works.</p>
			<p id="c14p10" title="#c14p10">They were drawn through his brain as bands of metal are drawn through a steel-plate from which they issue thin, light, and reduced to almost imperceptible wires; and he had ended by possessing only those books which could submit to such treatment and which were so solidly tempered as to withstand the rolling-mill of each new reading. In his desire to refine, he had restrained and almost sterilized his enjoyment, ever accentuating the irremediable conflict existing between his ideas and those of the world in which he had happened to be born. He had now reached such a pass that he could no longer discover any writings to content his secret longings. And his admiration even weaned itself from those volumes which had certainly contributed to sharpen his mind, making it so suspicious and subtle.</p>
			<p id="c14p11" title="#c14p11">In art, his ideas had sprung from a simple point of view. For him schools did not exist, and only the temperament of the writer mattered, only the working of his brain interested him, regardless of the subject. Unfortunately, this verity of appreciation, worthy of <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Palisse</span>, was scarcely applicable, for the simple reason that, even while desiring to be free of prejudices and passion, each person naturally goes to the works which most intimately correspond with his own temperament, and ends by relegating all others to the rear.</p>
			<p id="c14p12" title="#c14p12">This work of selection had slowly acted within him; not long ago he had adored the great <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Balzac</span>, but as his body weakened and his nerves became troublesome, his tastes modified and his admirations changed.</p>
			<p id="c14p13" title="#c14p13">Very soon, and despite the fact that he was aware of his injustice to the amazing author of the <i><span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Comédie humaine</span></i>, <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Des Esseintes</span> had reached a point where he no longer opened <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Balzac</span>‘s books; their healthy spirit jarred on him. Other aspirations now stirred in him, somehow becoming undefinable.</p>
			<p id="c14p14" title="#c14p14">Yet when he probed himself he understood that to attract, a work must have that character of strangeness demanded by Edgar Allen Poe; but he ventured even further on this path and called for Byzantine flora of brain and complicated deliquescences of language. He desired a troubled indecision on which he might brood until he could shape it at will to a more vague or determinate form, according to the momentary state of his soul. In short, he desired a work of art both for what it was in itself and for what it permitted him to endow it. He wished to pass by means of it into a sphere of sublimated sensation which would arouse in him new commotions whose cause he might long and vainly seek to analyze.</p>
			<p id="c14p15" title="#c14p15">In short, since leaving <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Paris</span>, <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Des Esseintes</span> was removing himself further and further from reality, especially from the contemporary world which he held in an ever growing detestation. This hatred had inevitably reacted on his literary and artistic tastes, and he would have as little as possible to do with paintings and books whose limited subjects dealt with modern life.</p>
			<p id="c14p16" title="#c14p16">Thus, losing the faculty of admiring beauty indiscriminately under whatever form it was presented, he preferred <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Flaubert</span>‘s <i><span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Tentation de saint Antoine</span></i> to his <i><span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Éducation sentimentale</span></i>; <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Goncourt</span>‘s <i><span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Faustin</span></i> to his <i><span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Germinie Lacerteux</span></i>; <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Zola</span>‘s <i><span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Faute de l’abbé Mouret</span></i> to his <i><span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Assommoir</span></i>.</p>
			<p id="c14p17" title="#c14p17">This point of view seemed logical to him; these works less immediate, but just as vibrant and human, enabled him to penetrate farther into the depths of the temperaments of these masters who revealed in them the most mysterious transports of their being with a more sincere abandon; and they lifted him far above this trivial life which wearied him so.</p>
			<p id="c14p18" title="#c14p18">In them he entered into a perfect communion of ideas with their authors who had written them when their state of soul was analogous to his own.</p>
			<p id="c14p19" title="#c14p19">In fact, when the period in which a man of talent is obliged to live is dull and stupid, the artist, though unconsciously, is haunted by a nostalgia of some past century.</p>
			<p id="c14p20" title="#c14p20">Finding himself unable to harmonize, save at rare intervals, with the environment in which he lives and not discovering sufficient distraction in the pleasures of observation and analysis, in the examination of the environment and its people, he feels in himself the dawning of strange ideas. Confused desires for other lands awake and are clarified by reflection and study. Instincts, sensations and thoughts bequeathed by heredity, awake, grow fixed, assert themselves with an imperious assurance. He recalls memories of beings and things he has never really known and a time comes when he escapes from the penitentiary of his age and roves, in full liberty, into another epoch with which, through a last illusion, he seems more in harmony.</p>
			<p id="c14p21" title="#c14p21">With some, it is a return to vanished ages, to extinct civilizations, to dead epochs; with others, it is an urge towards a fantastic future, to a more or less intense vision of a period about to dawn, whose image, by an effect of atavism of which he is unaware, is a reproduction of some past age.</p>
			<p id="c14p22" title="#c14p22">In <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Flaubert</span> this nostalgia is expressed in solemn and majestic pictures of magnificent splendors, in whose gorgeous, barbaric frames move palpitating and delicate creatures, mysterious and haughty⁠—women gifted, in the perfection of their beauty, with souls capable of suffering and in whose depths he discerned frightful derangements, mad aspirations, grieved as they were by the haunting premonition of the dissillusionments their follies held in store.</p>
			<p id="c14p23" title="#c14p23">The temperament of this great artist is fully revealed in the incomparable pages of the <i><span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Tentation de saint Antoine</span></i> and <i>Salammbô</i> where, far from our sorry life, he evokes the splendors of old Asia, the age of fervent prayer and mystic depression, of languorous passions and excesses induced by the unbearable ennui resulting from opulence and prayer.</p>
			<p id="c14p24" title="#c14p24">In <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">de Goncourt</span>, it was the nostalgia of the preceding century, a return to the elegances of a society forever lost. The stupendous setting of seas beating against jetties, of deserts stretching under torrid skies to distant horizons, did not exist in his nostalgic work which confined itself to a boudoir, near an aulic park, scented with the voluptuous fragrance of a woman with a tired smile, a perverse little pout and unresigned, pensive eyes. The soul with which he animated his characters was not that breathed by <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Flaubert</span> into his creatures, no longer the soul early thrown in revolt by the inexorable certainty that no new happiness is possible; it was a soul that had too late revolted, after the experience, against all the useless attempts to invent new spiritual liaisons and to heighten the enjoyment of lovers, which from immemorial times has always ended in satiety.</p>
			<p id="c14p25" title="#c14p25">Although she lived in, and partook of the life of our time, <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Faustin</span>, by her ancestral influences, was a creature of the past century whose cerebral lassitude and sensual excesses she possessed.</p>
			<p id="c14p26" title="#c14p26">This book of <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Edmond de Goncourt</span> was one of the volumes which <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Des Esseintes</span> loved best, and the suggestion of revery which he demanded lived in this work where, under each written line, another line was etched, visible to the spirit alone, indicated by a hint which revealed passion, by a reticence permitting one to divine subtle states of soul which no idiom could express. And it was no longer <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Flaubert</span>‘s language in its inimitable magnificence, but a morbid, perspicacious style, nervous and twisted, keen to note the impalpable impression that strikes the senses, a style expert in modulating the complicated nuances of an epoch which in itself was singularly complex. In short, it was the epithet indispensable to decrepit civilizations, no matter how old they be, which must have words with new meanings and forms, innovations in phrases and words for their complex needs.</p>
			<p id="c14p27" title="#c14p27">At Rome, the dying paganism had modified its prosody and transmuted its language with <span lang="la" xml:lang="la">Ausonius</span>, with Claudian and <span lang="la" xml:lang="la">Rutilius</span> whose attentive, scrupulous, sonorous and powerful style presented, in its descriptive parts especially, reflections, hints and nuances bearing an affinity with the style of <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">de Goncourt</span>.</p>
			<p id="c14p28" title="#c14p28">At <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Paris</span>, a fact unique in literary history had been consummated. That moribund society of the eighteenth century, which possessed painters, musicians and architects imbued with its tastes and doctrines, had not been able to produce a writer who could truly depict its dying elegances, the quintessence of its joys so cruelly expiated. It had been necessary to await the arrival of <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">de Goncourt</span> (whose temperament was formed of memories and regrets made more poignant by the sad spectacle of the intellectual poverty and the pitiful aspirations of his own time) to resuscitate, not only in his historical works, but even more in <i><span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Faustin</span></i>, the very soul of that period; incarnating its nervous refinements in this actress who tortured her mind and her senses so as to savor to exhaustion the grievous revulsives of love and of art.</p>
			<p id="c14p29" title="#c14p29">With <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Zola</span>, the nostalgia of the far-away was different. In him was no longing for vanished ages, no aspiring toward worlds lost in the night of time. His strong and solid temperament, dazzled with the luxuriance of life, its sanguine forces and moral health, diverted him from the artificial graces and painted chloroses of the past century, as well as from the hierarchic solemnity, the brutal ferocity and misty, effeminate dreams of the old orient. When he, too, had become obsessed by this nostalgia, by this need, which is nothing less than poetry itself, of shunning the contemporary world he was studying, he had rushed into an ideal and fruitful country, had dreamed of fantastic passions of skies, of long raptures of earth, and of fecund rains of pollen falling into panting organs of flowers. He had ended in a gigantic pantheism, had created, unwittingly perhaps, with this Edenesque environment in which he placed his Adam and Eve, a marvelous Hindoo poem, singing, in a style whose broad, crude strokes had something of the bizarre brilliance of an Indian painting, the song of the flesh, of animated living matter revealing, to the human creature, by its passion for reproduction the forbidden fruits of love, its suffocations, its instinctive caresses and natural attitudes.</p>
			<p id="c14p30" title="#c14p30">With <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Baudelaire</span>, these three masters had most affected <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Des Esseintes</span> in modern, French, secular literature. But he had read them so often, had saturated himself in them so completely, that in order to absorb them he had been compelled to lay them aside and let them remain unread on his shelves.</p>
			<p id="c14p31" title="#c14p31">Even now when the servant was arranging them for him, he did not care to open them, and contented himself merely with indicating the place they were to occupy and seeing that they were properly classified and put away.</p>
			<p id="c14p32" title="#c14p32">The servant brought him a new series of books. These oppressed him more. They were books toward which his taste had gradually veered, books which diverted him by their very faults from the perfection of more vigorous writers. Here, too, <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Des Esseintes</span> had reached the point where he sought, among these troubled pages, only phrases which discharged a sort of electricity that made him tremble; they transmitted their fluid through a medium which at first sight seemed refractory.</p>
			<p id="c14p33" title="#c14p33">Their imperfections pleased him, provided they were neither parasitic nor servile, and perhaps there was a grain of truth in his theory that the inferior and decadent writer, who is more subjective, though unfinished, distills a more irritating aperient and acid balm than the artist of the same period who is truly great. In his opinion, it was in their turbulent sketches that one perceived the exaltations of the most excitable sensibilities, the caprices of the most morbid psychological states, the most extravagant depravities of language charged, in spite of its rebelliousness, with the difficult task of containing the effervescent salts of sensations and ideas.</p>
			<p id="c14p34" title="#c14p34">Thus, after the masters, he betook himself to a few writers who attracted him all the more because of the disdain in which they were held by the public incapable of understanding them.</p>
			<p id="c14p35" title="#c14p35">One of them was <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Paul Verlaine</span> who had begun with a volume of verse, the <i><span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Poèmes Saturniens</span></i>, a rather ineffectual book where imitations of <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Leconte de Lisle</span> jostled with exercises in romantic rhetoric, but through which already filtered the real personality of the poet in such poems as the sonnet <i><span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Rêve Familier</span></i>.</p>
			<p id="c14p36" title="#c14p36">In searching for his antecedents, <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Des Esseintes</span> discovered, under the hesitant strokes of the sketches, a talent already deeply affected by <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Baudelaire</span>, whose influence had been accentuated later on, acquiesced in by the peerless master; but the imitation was never flagrant.</p>
			<p id="c14p37" title="#c14p37">And in some of his books, <i><span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Bonne Chanson</span></i>, <i><span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Fêtes Galantes</span></i>, <i><span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Romances sans paroles</span></i>, and his last volume, <i><span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Sagesse</span></i>, were poems where he himself was revealed as an original and outstanding figure.</p>
			<p id="c14p38" title="#c14p38">With rhymes obtained from verb tenses, sometimes even from long adverbs preceded by a monosyllable from which they fell as from a rock into a heavy cascade of water, his verses, divided by improbable cæsuras, often became strangely obscure with their audacious ellipses and strange inaccuracies which none the less did not lack grace.</p>
			<p id="c14p39" title="#c14p39">With his unrivalled ability to handle metre, he had sought to rejuvenate the fixed poetic forms. He turned the tail of the sonnet into the air, like those Japanese fish of polychrome clay which rest on stands, their heads straight down, their tails on top. Sometimes he corrupted it by using only masculine rhymes to which he seemed partial. He had often employed a bizarre form⁠—a stanza of three lines whose middle verse was unrhymed, and a tiercet with but one rhyme, followed by a single line, an echoing refrain like “<span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Dansons la Gigue</span>” in <i>Streets</i>. He had employed other rhymes whose dim echoes are repeated in remote stanzas, like faint reverberations of a bell.</p>
			<p id="c14p40" title="#c14p40">But his personality expressed itself most of all in vague and delicious confidences breathed in hushed accents, in the twilight. He alone had been able to reveal the troubled Ultima Thules of the soul; low whisperings of thoughts, avowals so haltingly and murmuringly confessed that the ear which hears them remains hesitant, passing on to the soul languors quickened by the mystery of this suggestion which is divined rather than felt. Everything characteristic of <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Verlaine</span> was expressed in these adorable verses of the <i><span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Fêtes Galantes</span></i>:</p>
			<blockquote lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">
				<div class="line">Le soir tombait, un soir équivoque</div>
				<div class="line"> d’automne,</div>
				<div class="line">Les belles se pendant rêveuses à nos</div>
				<div class="line"> bras,</div>
				<div class="line">Dirent alors des mots si spécieux tout</div>
				<div class="line"> bas,</div>
				<div class="line">Que notre âme depuis ce temps</div>
				<div class="line"> tremble et s’étonne</div>
			</blockquote>
			<p id="c14p41" title="#c14p41">It was no longer the immense horizon opened by the unforgettable portals of <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Baudelaire</span>; it was a crevice in the moonlight, opening on a field which was more intimate and more restrained, peculiar to <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Verlaine</span> who had formulated his poetic system in those lines of which <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Des Esseintes</span> was so fond:</p>
			<blockquote lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">
				<div class="line">Car nous voulons la nuance encore,</div>
				<div class="line">Pas la couleur, rien que la nuance.</div>
				<div class="line">Et tout le reste est litterature.</div>
			</blockquote>
			<p id="c14p42" title="#c14p42"><span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Des Esseintes</span> had followed him with delight in his most diversified works. After his <i><span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Romances sans paroles</span></i> which had appeared in a journal, <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Verlaine</span> had preserved a long silence, reappearing later in those charming verses, hauntingly suggestive of the gentle and cold accents of <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Villon</span>, singing of the Virgin, “removed from our days of carnal thought and weary flesh.” <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Des Esseintes</span> often re-read <i><span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Sagesse</span></i> whose poems provoked him to secret reveries, a fanciful love for a Byzantine Madonna who, at a certain moment, changed into a distracted modern <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Cydalise</span> so mysterious and troubling that one could not know whether she aspired toward depravities so monstrous that they became irresistible, or whether she moved in an immaculate dream where the adoration of the soul floated around her ever unavowed and ever pure.</p>
			<p id="c14p43" title="#c14p43">There were other poets, too, who induced him to confide himself to them: <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Tristan Corbière</span> who, in 1873, in the midst of the general apathy had issued a most eccentric volume entitled: <i><span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Les Amours jaunes</span></i>. <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Des Esseintes</span> who, in his hatred of the banal and commonplace, would gladly have accepted the most affected folly and the most singular extravagance, spent many enjoyable hours with this work where drollery mingled with a disordered energy, and where disconcerting lines blazed out of poems so absolutely obscure as the litanies of <i><span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Sommeil</span></i>, that they qualified their author for the name of</p>
			<blockquote lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">
				<p>Obscène confesseur des dévotes mort-nées.</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p id="c14p44" title="#c14p44">The style was hardly French. The author wrote in the negro dialect, was telegraphic in form, suppressed verbs, affected a teasing phraseology, revelled in the impossible puns of a travelling salesman; then out of this jumble, laughable conceits and sly affectations emerged, and suddenly a cry of keen anguish rang out, like the snapping string of a violoncello. And with all this, in his hard rugged style, bristling with obsolescent words and unexpected neologisms, flashed perfect originalities, treasures of expression and superbly nomadic lines amputated of rhyme. Finally, over and above his <i><span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Poèmes Parisiens</span></i>, where <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Des Esseintes</span> had discovered this profound definition of woman:</p>
			<blockquote lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">
				<p>Éternel féminin de l’éternel jocrisse</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p id="c14p45" title="#c14p45"><span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Tristan Corbière</span> had celebrated in a powerfully concise style, the Sea of Brittany, mermaids and the Pardon of Saint Anne. And he had even risen to an eloquence of hate in the insults he hurled, apropos of the Conlie camp, at the individuals whom he designated under the name of “foreigners of the Fourth of September.”</p>
			<p id="c14p46" title="#c14p46">The raciness of which he was so fond, which <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Corbière</span> offered him in his sharp epithets, his beauties which ever remained a trifle suspect, <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Des Esseintes</span> found again in another poet, <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Théodore Hannon</span>, a disciple of <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Baudelaire</span> and <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Gautier</span>, moved by a very unusual sense of the exquisite and the artificial.</p>
			<p id="c14p47" title="#c14p47">Unlike <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Verlaine</span> whose work was directly influenced by <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Baudelaire</span>, especially on the psychological side, in his insidious nuances of thought and skilful quintessence of sentiment, <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Théodore Hannon</span> especially descended from the master on the plastic side, by the external vision of persons and things.</p>
			<p id="c14p48" title="#c14p48">His charming corruption fatally corresponded to the tendencies of <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Des Esseintes</span> who, on misty or rainy days, enclosed himself in the retreat fancied by the poet and intoxicated his eyes with the rustlings of his fabrics, with the incandescence of his stones, with his exclusively material sumptuousness which ministered to cerebral reactions, and rose like a cantharides powder in a cloud of fragrant incense toward a Brussel idol with painted face and belly stained by the perfumes.</p>
			<p id="c14p49" title="#c14p49">With the exception of the works of these poets and of <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Stéphane Mallarmé</span>, which his servant was told to place to one side so that he might classify them separately, <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Des Esseintes</span> was but slightly attracted towards the poets.</p>
			<p id="c14p50" title="#c14p50">Notwithstanding the majestic form and the imposing quality of his verse which struck such a brilliant note that even the hexameters of <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Hugo</span> seemed pale in comparison, <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Leconte de Lisle</span> could no longer satisfy him. The antiquity so marvelously restored by <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Flaubert</span> remained cold and immobile in his hands. Nothing palpitated in his verses, which lacked depth and which, most often, contained no idea. Nothing moved in those gloomy, waste poems whose impassive mythologies ended by finally leaving him cold. Too, after having long delighted in <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Gautier</span>, <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Des Esseintes</span> reached the point where he no longer cared for him. The admiration he felt for this man’s incomparable painting had gradually dissolved; now he was more astonished than ravished by his descriptions. Objects impressed themselves upon <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Gautier</span>‘s perceptive eyes but they went no further, they never penetrated deeper into his brain and flesh. Like a giant mirror, this writer constantly limited himself to reflecting surrounding objects with impersonal clearness. Certainly, <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Des Esseintes</span> still loved the works of these two poets, as he loved rare stones and precious objects, but none of the variations of these perfect instrumentalists could hold him longer, neither being evocative of revery, neither opening for him, at least, broad roads of escape to beguile the tedium of dragging hours.</p>
			<p id="c14p51" title="#c14p51">These two books left him unsatisfied. And it was the same with <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Hugo</span>; the oriental and patriarchal side was too conventional and barren to detain him. And his manners, at once childish and that of a grandfather, exasperated him. He had to go to the <i><span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Chansons des rues et des bois</span></i> to enjoy the perfect acrobatics of his metrics. But how gladly, after all, would he not have exchanged all this <i>tour de force</i> for a new work by <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Baudelaire</span> which might equal the others, for he, decidedly, was almost the only one whose verses, under their splendid form, contained a healing and nutritive substance. In passing from one extreme to the other, from form deprived of ideas to ideas deprived of form, <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Des Esseintes</span> remained no less circumspect and cold. The psychological labyrinths of <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Stendhal</span>, the analytical detours of <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Duranty</span> seduced him, but their administrative, colorless and arid language, their static prose, fit at best for the wretched industry of the theatre, repelled him. Then their interesting works and their astute analyses applied to brains agitated by passions in which he was no longer interested. He was not at all concerned with general affections or points of view, with associations of common ideas, now that the reserve of his mind was more keenly developed and that he no longer admitted aught but superfine sensations and catholic or sensual torments. To enjoy a work which should combine, according to his wishes, incisive style with penetrating and feline analysis, he had to go to the master of induction, the profound and strange Edgar Allen Poe, for whom, since the time when he re-read him, his preference had never wavered.</p>
			<p id="c14p52" title="#c14p52">More than any other, perhaps, he approached, by his intimate affinity, <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Des Esseintes</span>‘ meditative cast of mind.</p>
			<p id="c14p53" title="#c14p53">If <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Baudelaire</span>, in the hieroglyphics of the soul, had deciphered the return of the age of sentiment and ideas, Poe, in the field of morbid psychology had more especially investigated the domain of the soul.</p>
			<p id="c14p54" title="#c14p54">Under the emblematic title, <i>The Demon of Perversity</i>, he had been the first in literature to pry into the irresistible, unconscious impulses of the will which mental pathology now explains more scientifically. He had also been the first to divulge, if not to signal the impressive influence of fear which acts on the will like an anæsthetic, paralyzing sensibility and like the curare, stupefying the nerves. It was on the problem of the lethargy of the will, that Poe had centered his studies, analyzing the effects of this moral poison, indicating the symptoms of its progress, the troubles commencing with anxiety, continuing through anguish, ending finally in the terror which deadens the will without intelligence succumbing, though sorely disturbed. Death, which the dramatists had so much abused, he had in some manner changed and made more poignant, by introducing an algebraic and superhuman element; but in truth, it was less the real agony of the dying person which he described and more the moral agony of the survivor, haunted at the death bed by monstrous hallucinations engendered by grief and fatigue. With a frightful fascination, he dwelt on acts of terror, on the snapping of the will, coldly reasoning about them, little by little making the reader gasp, suffocated and panting before these feverish mechanically contrived nightmares.</p>
			<p id="c14p55" title="#c14p55">Convulsed by hereditary neurosis, maddened by a moral St. Vitus dance, Poe’s creatures lived only through their nerves; his women, the Morellas and Ligeias, possessed an immense erudition. They were steeped in the mists of German philosophy and the cabalistic mysteries of the old Orient; and all had the boyish and inert breasts of angels, all were sexless.</p>
			<p id="c14p56" title="#c14p56"><span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Baudelaire</span> and Poe, these two men who had often been compared because of their common poetic strain and predilection for the examination of mental maladies, differed radically in the affective conceptions which held such a large place in their works; <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Baudelaire</span> with his iniquitous and debased loves⁠—cruel loves which made one think of the reprisals of an inquisition; Poe with his chaste, ærial loves, in which the senses played no part, where only the mind functioned without corresponding to organs which, if they existed, remained forever frozen and virgin. This cerebral clinic where, vivisecting in a stifling atmosphere, that spiritual surgeon became, as soon as his attention flagged, a prey to an imagination which evoked, like delicious miasmas, somnambulistic and angelic apparitions, was to <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Des Esseintes</span> a source of unwearying conjecture. But now that his nervous disorders were augmented, days came when his readings broke his spirit and when, hands trembling, body alert, like the desolate Usher he was haunted by an unreasoning fear and a secret terror.</p>
			<p id="c14p57" title="#c14p57">Thus he was compelled to moderate his desires, and he rarely touched these fearful elixirs, in the same way that he could no longer with impunity visit his red corridor and grow ecstatic at the sight of the gloomy <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Odilon Redon</span> prints and the <span lang="nl" xml:lang="nl">Jan Luyken</span> horrors. And yet, when he felt inclined to read, all literature seemed to him dull after these terrible American imported philtres. Then he betook himself to <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Villiers de L’Isle Adam</span> in whose scattered works he noted seditious observations and spasmodic vibrations, but which no longer gave one, with the exception of his <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Claire Lenoir</span>, such troubling horror.</p>
			<p id="c14p58" title="#c14p58">This <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Claire Lenoir</span> which appeared in 1867 in the <i><span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Revue des lettres et des arts</span></i>, opened a series of tales comprised under the title of <i><span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Histoires Moroses</span></i> where against a background of obscure speculations borrowed from old <span lang="de" xml:lang="de">Hegel</span>, dislocated creatures stirred, Dr. <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Tribulat Bonhomet</span>, solemn and childish, a <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Claire Lenoir</span>, farcical and sinister, with blue spectacles, round and large as franc pieces, which covered her almost dead eyes.</p>
			<p id="c14p59" title="#c14p59">This story centered about a simple adultery and ended with an inexpressible terror when <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Bonhomet</span>, opening <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Claire</span>‘s eyelids, as she lies in her death bed, and penetrating them with monstrous plummets, distinctively perceives the reflection of the husband brandishing the lover’s decapitated head, while shouting a war song, like a Kanaka.</p>
			<p id="c14p60" title="#c14p60">Based on this more or less just observation that the eyes of certain animals, cows for instance, preserve even to decomposition, like photographic plates, the image of the beings and things their eyes behold at the moment they expire, this story evidently derived from Poe, from whom he appropriated the terrifying and elaborate technique.</p>
			<p id="c14p61" title="#c14p61">This also applied to the <i><span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Intersigne</span></i>, which had later been joined to the <i><span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Contes cruels</span></i>, a collection of indisputable talent in which was found <i><span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Véra</span></i>, which <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Des Esseintes</span> considered a little masterpiece.</p>
			<p id="c14p62" title="#c14p62">Here, the hallucination was marked with an exquisite tenderness; no longer was it the dark mirages of the American author, but the fluid, warm, almost celestial vision; it was in an identical genre, the reverse of the Beatrices and Legeias, those gloomy and dark phantoms engendered by the inexorable nightmare of opium.</p>
			<p id="c14p63" title="#c14p63">This story also put in play the operations of the will, but it no longer treated of its defeats and helplessness under the effects of fear; on the contrary, it studied the exaltations of the will under the impulse of a fixed idea; it demonstrated its power which often succeeded in saturating the atmosphere and in imposing its qualities on surrounding objects.</p>
			<p id="c14p64" title="#c14p64">Another book by <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Villiers de L’Isle Adam</span>, <i><span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Isis</span></i>, seemed to him curious in other respects. The philosophic medley of <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Clair Lenoir</span> was evident in this work which offered an unbelievable jumble of verbal and troubled observations, souvenirs of old melodramas, poniards and rope ladders⁠—all the romanticism which <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Villiers de L’Isle Adam</span> could never rejuvenate in his <i><span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Elën</span></i> and <i><span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Morgane</span></i>, forgotten pieces published by an obscure man, <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Sieur Francisque Guyon</span>.</p>
			<p id="c14p65" title="#c14p65">The heroine of this book, <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Marquise Tullia Fabriana</span>, reputed to have assimilated the Chaldean science of the women of Edgar Allen Poe, and the diplomatic sagacities of <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Stendhal</span>, had the enigmatic countenance of <span lang="it" xml:lang="it">Bradamante</span> abused by an antique Circe. These insoluble mixtures developed a fuliginous vapor across which philosophic and literary influences jostled, without being able to be regulated in the author’s brain when he wrote the prolegomenæ of this work which could not have embraced less than seven volumes.</p>
			<p id="c14p66" title="#c14p66">But there was another side to <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Villiers</span>‘ temperament. It was piercing and acute in an altogether different sense⁠—a side of forbidding pleasantry and fierce raillery. No longer was it the paradoxical mystifications of Poe, but a scoffing that had in it the lugubrious and savage comedy which Swift possessed. A series of sketches, <i><span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">les Demoiselles de Bienfilâtre</span></i>, <i><span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">l’Affichage céleste</span></i>, <i><span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">la Machine à gloire</span></i>, and <i><span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">le Plus beau dîner du monde</span></i>, betrayed a singularly inventive and keenly bantering mind. The whole order of contemporary and utilitarian ideas, the whole commercialized baseness of the age were glorified in stories whose poignant irony transported <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Des Esseintes</span>.</p>
			<p id="c14p67" title="#c14p67">No other French book had been written in this serious and bitter style. At the most, a tale by <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Charles Cros</span>, <i><span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">La science de l’amour</span></i>, printed long ago in the <i><span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Revue du Monde-Nouveau</span></i>, could astonish by reason of its chemical whims, by its affected humor and by its coldly facetious observations. But the pleasure to be extracted from the story was merely relative, since its execution was a dismal failure. The firm, colored and often original style of <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Villiers</span> had disappeared to give way to a mixture scraped on the literary bench of the first-comer.</p>
			<p id="c14p68" title="#c14p68">“Heavens! heavens! how few books are really worth re-reading,” sighed <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Des Esseintes</span>, gazing at the servant who left the stool on which he had been perched, to permit <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Des Esseintes</span> to survey his books with a single glance.</p>
			<p id="c14p69" title="#c14p69"><span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Des Esseintes</span> nodded his head. But two small books remained on the table. With a sigh, he dismissed the old man, and turned over the leaves of a volume bound in onager skin which had been glazed by a hydraulic press and speckled with silver clouds. It was held together by fly-leaves of old silk damask whose faint patterns held that charm of faded things celebrated by <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Mallarmé</span> in an exquisite poem.</p>
			<p id="c14p70" title="#c14p70">These pages, numbering nine, had been extracted from copies of the two first Parnassian books; it was printed on parchment paper and preceded by this title: <i><span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Quelques vers de Mallarmé</span></i>, designed in a surprising calligraphy in uncial letters, illuminated and relieved with gold, as in old manuscripts.</p>
			<p id="c14p71" title="#c14p71">Among the eleven poems brought together in these covers, several invited him: <i><span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Les fenêtres</span></i>, <i><span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">l’épilogue</span></i> and <i><span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Azur</span></i>; but one among them all, a fragment of the <i><span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Hérodiade</span></i>, held him at certain hours in a spell.</p>
			<p id="c14p72" title="#c14p72">How often, beneath the lamp that threw a low light on the silent chamber, had he not felt himself haunted by this <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Hérodiade</span> who, in the work of <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Gustave Moreau</span>, was now plunged in gloom revealing but a dim white statue in a brazier extinguished by stones.</p>
			<p id="c14p73" title="#c14p73">The darkness concealed the blood, the reflections and the golds, hid the temple’s farther sides, drowned the supernumeraries of the crime enshrouded in their dead colors, and, only sparing the aquerelle whites, revealed the woman’s jewels and heightened her nudity.</p>
			<p id="c14p74" title="#c14p74">At such times he was forced to gaze upon her unforgotten outlines; and she lived for him, her lips articulating those bizarre and delicate lines which <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Mallarmé</span> makes her utter:</p>
			<blockquote lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">
				<div class="line"> O miroir!</div>
				<div class="line">Eau froide par l’ennui dans ton cadre</div>
				<div class="line"> gelée</div>
				<div class="line">Que de fois, et pendant les heures,</div>
				<div class="line"> désolée</div>
				<div class="line">Des songes et cherchant mes souvenirs</div>
				<div class="line"> qui sont</div>
				<div class="line">Comme des feuilles sous ta glace au</div>
				<div class="line"> trou profond,</div>
				<div class="line">Je m’apparus en toi comme une ombre</div>
				<div class="line"> lointaine!</div>
				<div class="line">Mais, horreur! des soirs, dans ta</div>
				<div class="line"> sévère fontaine,</div>
				<div class="line">J’ai de mon rêve épars connu la nudité!</div>
			</blockquote>
			<p id="c14p75" title="#c14p75">These lines he loved, as he loved the works of this poet who, in an age of democracy devoted to lucre, lived his solitary and literary life sheltered by his disdain from the encompassing stupidity, delighting, far from society, in the surprises of the intellect, in cerebral visions, refining on subtle ideas, grafting Byzantine delicacies upon them, perpetuating them in suggestions lightly connected by an almost imperceptible thread.</p>
			<p id="c14p76" title="#c14p76">These twisted and precious ideas were bound together with an adhesive and secret language full of phrase contractions, ellipses and bold tropes.</p>
			<p id="c14p77" title="#c14p77">Perceiving the remotest analogies, with a single term which by an effect of similitude at once gave the form, the perfume, the color and the quality, he described the object or being to which otherwise he would have been compelled to place numerous and different epithets so as to disengage all their facets and nuances, had he simply contented himself with indicating the technical name. Thus he succeeded in dispensing with the comparison, which formed in the reader’s mind by analogy as soon as the symbol was understood. Neither was the attention of the reader diverted by the enumeration of the qualities which the juxtaposition of adjectives would have induced. Concentrating upon a single word, he produced, as for a picture, the ensemble, a unique and complete aspect.</p>
			<p id="c14p78" title="#c14p78">It became a concentrated literature, an essential unity, a sublimate of art. This style was at first employed with restraint in his earlier works, but <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Mallarmé</span> had boldly proclaimed it in a verse on <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Théophile Gautier</span> and in <i><span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">l’Après-midi du faune</span></i>, an eclogue where the subtleties of sensual joys are described in mysterious and caressing verses suddenly pierced by this wild, rending faun cry:</p>
			<blockquote lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">
				<div class="line">Alors m’éveillerai-je à la ferveur</div>
				<div class="line"> première,</div>
				<div class="line">Droit et seul sous un flot antique de</div>
				<div class="line"> lumière,</div>
				<div class="line">Lys! et l’un de vous tous pour</div>
				<div class="line"> l’ingénuité.</div>
			</blockquote>
			<p id="c14p79" title="#c14p79">That line with the monosyllable <i><span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">lys</span></i> like a sprig, evoked the image of something rigid, slender and white; it rhymed with the substantive <i><span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">ingénuité</span></i>, allegorically expressing, by a single term, the passion, the effervescence, the fugitive mood of a virgin faun amorously distracted by the sight of nymphs.</p>
			<p id="c14p80" title="#c14p80">In this extraordinary poem, surprising and unthought of images leaped up at the end of each line, when the poet described the elations and regrets of the faun contemplating, at the edge of a fen, the tufts of reeds still preserving, in its transitory mould, the form made by the naiades who had occupied it.</p>
			<p id="c14p81" title="#c14p81">Then, <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Des Esseintes</span> also experienced insidious delights in touching this diminutive book whose cover of Japan vellum, as white as curdled milk, were held together by two silk bands, one of Chinese rose, the other of black.</p>
			<p id="c14p82" title="#c14p82">Hidden behind the cover, the black band rejoined the rose which rested like a touch of modern Japanese paint or like a lascivious adjutant against the antique white, against the candid carnation tint of the book, and enlaced it, united its sombre color with the light color into a light rosette. It insinuated a faint warning of that regret, a vague menace of that sadness which succeeds the ended transports and the calmed excitements of the senses.</p>
			<p id="c14p83" title="#c14p83"><span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Des Esseintes</span> placed <i><span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">l’Après-midi du faune</span></i> on the table and examined another little book he had printed, an anthology of prose poems, a tiny chapel, placed under the invocation of <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Baudelaire</span> and opening on the parvise of his poems.</p>
			<p id="c14p84" title="#c14p84">This anthology comprised a selection of <i><span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Gaspard de la nuit</span></i> of that fantastic <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Aloysius Bertrand</span> who had transferred the behavior of Leonard in prose and, with his metallic oxydes, painted little pictures whose vivid colors sparkle like those of clear enamels. To this, <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Des Esseintes</span> had joined <i><span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">le Vox populi</span></i> of <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Villiers</span>, a superb piece of work in a hammered, golden style after the manner of <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Leconte de Lisle</span> and of <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Flaubert</span>, and some selections from that delicate <i><span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">livre de Jade</span></i> whose exotic perfume of ginseng and of tea blends with the odorous freshness of water babbling along the book, under moonlight.</p>
			<p id="c14p85" title="#c14p85">But in this collection had been gathered certain poems resurrected from defunct reviews: <i><span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">le Démon de l’analogie</span></i>, <i><span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">la Pipe</span></i>, <i><span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">le Pauvre enfant pâle</span></i>, <i><span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">le Spectacle interrompu</span></i>, <i><span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">le Phénomène futur</span></i>, and especially <i><span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Plaintes d’automne</span></i> and <i><span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Frisson d’hiver</span></i> which were <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Mallarmé</span>‘s masterpieces and were also celebrated among the masterpieces of prose poems, for they united such a magnificently delicate language that they cradled, like a melancholy incantation or a maddening melody, thoughts of an irresistible suggestiveness, pulsations of the soul of a sensitive person whose excited nerves vibrate with a keenness which penetrates ravishingly and induces a sadness.</p>
			<p id="c14p86" title="#c14p86">Of all the forms of literature, that of the prose poem was the form <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Des Esseintes</span> preferred. Handled by an alchemist of genius, it contained in its slender volume the strength of the novel whose analytic developments and descriptive redundancies it suppressed. Quite often, <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Des Esseintes</span> had meditated on that disquieting problem⁠—to write a novel concentrated in a few phrases which should contain the essence of hundreds of pages always employed to establish the setting, to sketch the characters, and to pile up observations and minute details. Then the chosen words would be so unexchangeable that they would do duty for many others, the adjective placed in such an ingenious and definite fashion that it could not be displaced, opening such perspectives that the reader could dream for whole weeks on its sense at once precise and complex, could record the present, reconstruct the past, divine the future of the souls of the characters, revealed by the gleams of this unique epithet.</p>
			<p id="c14p87" title="#c14p87">Thus conceived and condensed in a page or two, the novel could become a communion of thought between a magical writer and an ideal reader, a spiritual collaboration agreed to between ten superior persons scattered throughout the universe, a delight offered to the refined, and accessible to them alone.</p>
			<p id="c14p88" title="#c14p88">To <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Des Esseintes</span>, the prose poem represented the concrete juice of literature, the essential oil of art.</p>
			<p id="c14p89" title="#c14p89">That succulence, developed and concentrated into a drop, already existed in <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Baudelaire</span> and in those poems of <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Mallarmé</span> which he read with such deep joy.</p>
			<p id="c14p90" title="#c14p90">When he had closed his anthology, <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Des Esseintes</span> told himself that his books which had ended on this last book, would probably never have anything added to it.</p>
			<p id="c14p91" title="#c14p91">In fact, the decadence of a literature, irreparably affected in its organism, enfeebled by old ideas, exhausted by excesses of syntax, sensitive only to the curiosities which make sick persons feverish, and yet intent upon expressing everything in its decline, eager to repair all the omissions of enjoyment, to bequeath the most subtle memories of grief in its death bed, was incarnate in <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Mallarmé</span>, in the most perfect exquisite manner imaginable.</p>
			<p id="c14p92" title="#c14p92">Here were the quintessences of <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Baudelaire</span> and of Poe; here were their fine and powerful substances distilled and disengaging new flavors and intoxications.</p>
			<p id="c14p93" title="#c14p93">It was the agony of the old language which, after having become moldy from age to age, ended by dissolving, by reaching that deliquescence of the Latin language which expired in the mysterious concepts and the enigmatical expressions of Saint Boniface and Saint Adhelme.</p>
			<p id="c14p94" title="#c14p94">The decomposition of the French language had been effected suddenly. In the Latin language, a long transition, a distance of four hundred years existed between the spotted and superb epithet of Claudian and <span lang="la" xml:lang="la">Rutilius</span> and the gamy epithet of the eighth century. In the French language, no lapse of time, no succession of ages had taken place; the stained and superb style of the <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">de Goncourt</span>s and the gamy style of <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Verlaine</span> and <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Mallarmé</span> jostled in <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Paris</span>, living in the same period, epoch and century.</p>
			<p id="c14p95" title="#c14p95">And <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Des Esseintes</span>, gazing at one of the folios opened on his chapel desk, smiled at the thought that the moment would soon come when an erudite scholar would prepare for the decadence of the French language a glossary similar to that in which the savant, <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Du Cange</span>, has noted the last murmurings, the last spasms, the last flashes of the Latin language dying of old age in the cloisters and sounding its death rattle.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
